[Music]
thank you
I'm sure that throughout the hundred
thousand odd years of our species
existence
and even before
our ancestors looked up at the night sky
and wondered what stars are
uh wondering therefore
how to explain what they saw in terms of
things unseen
um
okay so most people only wondered that
occasionally like today in breaks from
whatever normally preoccupied them but
what normally preoccupied them also
involved yearning to know they wished
they knew how to prevent their food
supply from sometimes failing and how
they could rest when they were tired
without risking starvation
uh be be warmer cooler safer in less
pain I bet those prehistoric cave
artists would have loved to know
how to draw better
in every aspect of their lives
they wished for Progress just as we do
but they failed almost completely to
make any
they didn't know how to discoveries like
like um fire
um it happens so rarely that from an
individual's point of view the world
never improved nothing new was learned
the the first clue to the origin of
Starlight happened as recently as 1899.
radioactivity
and within 40 years physicists
discovered the whole explanation
expressed as usual in elegant symbols
but never mind the symbols
think how many discoveries
they represent a nuclei and nuclear
reactions of course but isotopes
particles of electricity
anti-matter
neutrinos
the conversion of Mass to energy that's
E equals m c squared gamma rays
transmutation
that ancient dream that had always
eluded the Alchemists was achieved
through these same theories that
explained Starlight and other ancient
Mysteries and new unexpected phenomena
that all that
discovered in 40 years had not been in
the previous hundred thousand was not
for lack of thinking
about stars and all those other
urgent problems they had they even
arrived at answers such as myths that
dominated their lives yet
bore almost no resemblance to the truth
the tragedy of that protracted
stagnation
isn't sufficiently recognized I think
these are people with brains of
essentially the same design that
eventually did discover all those things
but that ability
to make progress remained almost unused
until
the event that revolutionized The Human
Condition and changed the universe or so
we should hope because that event was
the Scientific Revolution ever since
which our knowledge of the physical
world and of how to adapt it to our
wishes
has been growing relentlessly now what
had changed what were people now doing
for the first time that made that
difference between
stagnation and Rapid open-ended
discovery
how to make that difference is surely
the most important universal truth that
it's possible to know
and worryingly there's no consensus
about what it is
so I'll tell you but I'll have to
backtrack a little first
before the Scientific Revolution
they believed that everything important
knowable was already known enshrined in
ancient writings institutions and in
some genuinely useful rules of thumb
which were however entrenched as dogmas
along with many falsehoods so they
believed that knowledge came from
authorities that actually knew very
little and therefore progress depended
on learning how to reject the authority
of learned men the priests traditions
and rulers which is why the Scientific
Revolution had to have a wider context
the enlightenment a revolution in how
people sought knowledge trying not to
rely on Authority take no one's word for
it but that can't be what made the
difference authorities had been rejected
before many times and that rarely if
ever caused anything like the Scientific
Revolution at the time what they thought
distinguished science
was a radical idea about things unseen
known as empiricism
all knowledge derives from the senses
well uh we've seen that that can't be
true it did help by promoting
observation and experiment but from the
outset it was obvious that there was
something horribly wrong with it
knowledge comes from the senses in what
language certainly not the language of
mathematics which Galileo rightly said
the book of nature is written
look at the world you don't see
equations carved on Mountain sides
if you did it would be because people
had carved them
by the way why don't we do that
what's wrong with us
empiricism is inadequate because
well scientific theories explain the
scene in terms of the Unseen and the
Unseen you have to admit doesn't come to
us through the senses we don't see those
nuclear reactions in Stars we don't see
the Origin of Species we don't see the
curvature of space-time and other
universes but we know about those things
how
well the classic empiricist answer
is induction the Unseen resembles the
scene but it doesn't
you know what the clinching evidence was
that the space time is curved it was a
photograph not of space-time but of an
eclipse with a DOT there rather than
there the evidence for evolution some
rocks and some finches
and parallel universes again dots there
rather than there on a screen what we
see in all these cases
Bears no resemblance to the reality that
we conclude is responsible only a long
chain of theoretical reasoning and
interpretation connects them ah say
creationists so you admit it's all
interpretation no one's ever seen
Evolution we see rocks you have your
interpretation we have ours yours comes
from guesswork Ours from the Bible
but
what creationists and empiricists both
ignore
is that in that sense no one's ever seen
a Bible either
that the eye only detects light which we
don't perceive brains only detect nerve
impulses
and they don't perceive even those as
what they really are namely electrical
crackles so we perceive nothing as what
it really is our connection to reality
is never just perception it's always as
Carl popper put it
Theory Laden
scientific knowledge isn't derived from
anything it's like all knowledge it's
conjectural guesswork
tested by observation
not derived from it
so were testable conjectures the great
Innovation that opened the intellectual
prison Gates no contrary to what's
usually said testability is common in
myths and all sorts of other irrational
modes of thinking any crank claiming the
sun will go out next Tuesday has got a
testable prediction
consider the ancient Greek myth
explaining seasons
Hades god of the underworld kidnaps
Persephone the goddess of spring and
negotiates a forced marriage contract
requiring her to return regularly and
lets her go and each year she is
magically compelled to return and her
mother demita goddess of the earth is
sad and makes it cold and barren
that myth is testable if winter is
caused by demita's sadness then it must
happen everywhere on Earth
simultaneously
so if the ancient Greeks had only known
that Australia is at its warmest when
Demeter is at her saddest
they'd have known that their theory is
false
so what was wrong with that myth and
with all pre-scientific thinking and
what then made that momentous difference
I think there's one thing you have to
care about
and that implies testability the
scientific method the Enlightenment and
everything and here's the crucial thing
there is such a thing as a defect in a
story I don't just mean a logical defect
I mean a bad explanation what does that
mean well an explanation is an assertion
about what's there unseen that accounts
for what's seen because
the explanatory role of Persephone's
marriage contract could be played
equally well by infinitely many other ad
hoc entities why a marriage contract and
not any other reason for regular annual
action here's one
Persephone wasn't released she escaped
and returns Every Spring
to take revenge on Hades with her spring
powers
she cools his domain with spring air
venting heat up to the surface creating
summer that accounts for the same
phenomena as the original myth it's
equally testable
yet what it asserts about reality is in
many ways the opposite and that's
possible because the details of the
original myth are unrelated to Seasons
except via the myth itself
this easy variability
is the sign of a bad explanation
because
without a functional reason to prefer
one of
countless variants
advocating one of them in preference to
the others is irrational
so for the essence of what makes the
difference to enable progress
seek good explanations the ones that
can't be easily varied while still
explaining the phenomena
now our current explanation of seasons
is that the Earth's axis is tilted like
that
so each hemisphere tilts towards the Sun
for half the year and away for the other
half
it's better put that up
that's a good explanation
hard to vary because every detail plays
a functional role for instance we know
independently of Seasons that surfaces
tilted away from radiant heat are heated
less and that a spinning sphere
in space points in a constant Direction
and The Tilt
also explains the sun's angle of
elevation at different times of year and
predicts that the seasons will be out of
phase in the two hemispheres if they'd
been observed in phase
the theory would have been refuted but
now
the fact that it's also a good
explanation hard to vary makes the
crucial difference
if the ancient Greeks had found out
about seasons in Australia they could
have easily varied their myth to predict
that
for instance when Demeter is upset she
banishes heat from her vicinity into the
other hemisphere where it makes Summer
so being proved wrong by observation and
changing their Theory accordingly still
wouldn't have got the ancient Greeks one
jot closer to understanding Seasons
because their explanation was bad easy
to vary and it's only when an
explanation is good that it even matters
whether it's testable if the axis tilt
Theory had been refuted its Defenders
would have had nowhere to go no easily
implemented change could make that tilt
cause the same seasons in both
hemispheres
the search for hard to vary explanations
is the origin of all progress It's the
basic regulating principle of the
Enlightenment so in science two false
approaches blight progress one's well
known untestable theories but the more
important one is explanation-less
theories whenever you're told that some
existing statistical Trend will continue
but you aren't given a hard to vary
account of what causes that Trend you're
being told a wizard did it when you're
told that carrots have human rights
because they share half our genes but
not how Gene percentages confer rights
wizard when someone announces that the
nature nurture debate
has been settled because there's
evidence that a given percentage of our
political opinions are genetically
inherited but they don't explain how
genes cause opinions they've settled
nothing they're saying that our opinions
are caused by Wizards
and presumably so are their own
that that the truth
consists of hard to vary assertions
about reality is the most important fact
about the physical world
it's a fact that is itself unseen
yet impossible to vary thank you
[Applause]
[Music]
thank you